docs/CLI_COMMANDS.md, before:

# Kair Protocol CLI Commands

## Run Mode
Run commands from inside the container:

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
docker exec -it kair bash

# Then run short CLI commands
kair <command>
```

## Command Groups

### Propose and Plan
- `kair propose "<intent>" [--id <contract_id>]`
  - Top-level shorthand for contract propose.
- `kair contract propose "<intent>" [--id <contract_id>]`
  - Propose a contract.
- `kair plan [<contract_id>] [--last] [--provider <name>] [--model <name>] [--interactive <true|false>] [--json] [--debug] [--actor <name>|--by <name>] [<plan_json>]`
  - Interactive by default; generates/refines strict `kair.plan.v1` JSON and persists on accept.
  - Accepted plan shape: top-level `version`, `title`, `steps`; each step requires `id` + `summary`, with optional `details`.
  - With no contract id, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
  - `--interactive=false` accepts JSON from positional argument or stdin.
  - `--json` implies `--interactive=false`, requires JSON from positional argument or stdin, and prints only validated JSON.
  - `--actor` (alias: `--by`) attributes plan history entries.
- `kair contract plan <contract_id> "<plan>"`
  - Attach a legacy text plan and transition to `PLANNED`.

### Controls and Approval
- `kair grant list`
  - List static starter grants.
- `kair grant <grant> [--actor <name>]`
  - Approve a namespaced grant on the most recently updated contract.
- `kair grant <contract_id> <grant> [--actor <name>]`
  - Approve a namespaced grant on a specific contract.
- `kair contract request-approval <contract_id>`
  - Move a planned contract into approval request state.
- `kair approve [<contract_id>] [--last] [--actor <name>]`
  - Approve the contract and create a new immutable version.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract approve [<contract_id>] [--last] [--actor <name>]`
  - Same behavior as top-level `kair approve`.

### Execution and Recovery
- `kair run [<contract_id>] [--last] [--pause-at <checkpoint>] [--pause-authority <name>] [--pause-reason <text>]`
  - Top-level shorthand for contract run.
  - With no contract id, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract run [<contract_id>] [--last] [--pause-at <checkpoint>] [--pause-authority <name>] [--pause-reason <text>]`
  - Execute the approved contract.
  - With no contract id, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract pause <contract_id> [--actor <name>]`
  - Pause a running contract.
- `kair contract resume <contract_id> [--actor <name>]`
  - Resume from pause.
- `kair contract rewind <contract_id> [--actor <name>] [<reason>]`
  - Append a rewind/supersession event.

### Review and Evidence
- `kair review [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Show one-screen review for a specific contract, or the most recently updated contract.
  - With no args, defaults to the same behavior as `--last`.
- `kair accept <contract_id> [--actor <name>]`
  - Record explicit acceptance-of-responsibility as an append-only history event (audit trail).
  - Keeps lifecycle state unchanged; this is a governance acknowledgment step after reviewing evidence.
- `kair emit [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - List evidence checklist from `artifacts/<contract_id>/evidence/index.json`.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
  - `--last` targets the most recently updated contract.

### Inspection
- `kair status [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Print detailed contract state, versions, history, and artifacts.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract status [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Same behavior as top-level `kair status`.
- `kair contract list`
  - List known contract IDs.

## Review Output (What It Includes)
`kair review` and `kair review <id>` include:
- Contract ID, state, active version
- Approved intent (or current intent)
- Constraints (required/approved controls, budget)
- Execution summary (artifact count, last run artifact timestamp)
- Evidence checklist
- Decision action prompts for accept/grant/rewind/evidence

## Minimal Demo Flow

```bash
kair propose --id contract_demo "Contract Demo"
kair plan contract_demo --interactive=false '{"version":"kair.plan.v1","title":"Contract demo plan","steps":[{"id":"prepare-change","summary":"Prepare implementation details","details":"Gather change context and expected touchpoints."},{"id":"validate-change","summary":"Run tests and verify outcomes","details":"Run automated checks and capture evidence."}]}'
kair contract request-approval contract_demo
kair contract approve contract_demo --actor Damien
kair run
kair review
kair accept contract_demo --actor Damien
kair emit
```

Commit message:

feat(cli): default request-approval to latest contract when id is omitted
Align request-approval target resolution with other default-last workflows (approve/run/emit/status/review).

- Update request-approval command parsing to support [<contract_id>] [--last]

- Resolve to getLastContractId() when no contract id is provided

- Reject mixed id + --last usage with stable clear error

- Add invalid-argument guard for extra positional tokens with command-specific usage

- Update top-level and contract help text for optional-id request-approval

- Update command docs and README/demo examples to reflect no-id default behavior

- Extend e2e coverage to verify default-last, --last, explicit id, and conflict handling

docs/CLI_COMMANDS.md, after:

# Kair Protocol CLI Commands

## Run Mode
Run commands from inside the container:

```bash
docker compose up -d --build
docker exec -it kair bash

# Then run short CLI commands
kair <command>
```

## Command Groups

### Propose and Plan
- `kair propose "<intent>" [--id <contract_id>]`
  - Top-level shorthand for contract propose.
- `kair contract propose "<intent>" [--id <contract_id>]`
  - Propose a contract.
- `kair plan [<contract_id>] [--last] [--provider <name>] [--model <name>] [--interactive <true|false>] [--json] [--debug] [--actor <name>|--by <name>] [<plan_json>]`
  - Interactive by default; generates/refines strict `kair.plan.v1` JSON and persists on accept.
  - Accepted plan shape: top-level `version`, `title`, `steps`; each step requires `id` + `summary`, with optional `details`.
  - With no contract id, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
  - `--interactive=false` accepts JSON from positional argument or stdin.
  - `--json` implies `--interactive=false`, requires JSON from positional argument or stdin, and prints only validated JSON.
  - `--actor` (alias: `--by`) attributes plan history entries.
- `kair contract plan <contract_id> "<plan>"`
  - Attach a legacy text plan and transition to `PLANNED`.

### Controls and Approval
- `kair grant list`
  - List static starter grants.
- `kair grant <grant> [--actor <name>]`
  - Approve a namespaced grant on the most recently updated contract.
- `kair grant <contract_id> <grant> [--actor <name>]`
  - Approve a namespaced grant on a specific contract.
- `kair request-approval [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Top-level shorthand for contract request-approval.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract request-approval [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Move a planned contract into approval request state.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair approve [<contract_id>] [--last] [--actor <name>]`
  - Approve the contract and create a new immutable version.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract approve [<contract_id>] [--last] [--actor <name>]`
  - Same behavior as top-level `kair approve`.

### Execution and Recovery
- `kair run [<contract_id>] [--last] [--pause-at <checkpoint>] [--pause-authority <name>] [--pause-reason <text>]`
  - Top-level shorthand for contract run.
  - With no contract id, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract run [<contract_id>] [--last] [--pause-at <checkpoint>] [--pause-authority <name>] [--pause-reason <text>]`
  - Execute the approved contract.
  - With no contract id, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract pause <contract_id> [--actor <name>]`
  - Pause a running contract.
- `kair contract resume <contract_id> [--actor <name>]`
  - Resume from pause.
- `kair contract rewind <contract_id> [--actor <name>] [<reason>]`
  - Append a rewind/supersession event.

### Review and Evidence
- `kair review [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Show one-screen review for a specific contract, or the most recently updated contract.
  - With no args, defaults to the same behavior as `--last`.
- `kair accept <contract_id> [--actor <name>]`
  - Record explicit acceptance-of-responsibility as an append-only history event (audit trail).
  - Keeps lifecycle state unchanged; this is a governance acknowledgment step after reviewing evidence.
- `kair emit [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - List evidence checklist from `artifacts/<contract_id>/evidence/index.json`.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
  - `--last` targets the most recently updated contract.

### Inspection
- `kair status [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Print detailed contract state, versions, history, and artifacts.
  - With no args, defaults to the most recently updated contract.
- `kair contract status [<contract_id>] [--last]`
  - Same behavior as top-level `kair status`.
- `kair contract list`
  - List known contract IDs.

## Review Output (What It Includes)
`kair review` and `kair review <id>` include:
- Contract ID, state, active version
- Approved intent (or current intent)
- Constraints (required/approved controls, budget)
- Execution summary (artifact count, last run artifact timestamp)
- Evidence checklist
- Decision action prompts for accept/grant/rewind/evidence

## Minimal Demo Flow

```bash
kair propose --id contract_demo "Contract Demo"
kair plan contract_demo --interactive=false '{"version":"kair.plan.v1","title":"Contract demo plan","steps":[{"id":"prepare-change","summary":"Prepare implementation details","details":"Gather change context and expected touchpoints."},{"id":"validate-change","summary":"Run tests and verify outcomes","details":"Run automated checks and capture evidence."}]}'
kair request-approval
kair contract approve contract_demo --actor Damien
kair run
kair review
kair accept contract_demo --actor Damien
kair emit
```
